Stephen, Raymond, Alexander, George, Murphy, Peter Kemp, now a young man. How do you all know your name, I'll tell you? Just Steve, Kempel, do you? Uncle Steve or whatever. Men's business. Well, basically the men went out hunting for the big game, like emus and kangaroos and that type of stuff. There were ceremonies back in the day, but well that's gone through the event of the intervention of the churches and that. But some of the stuff still remains, so we still teach our young people stuff in the bush. We still talk about what used to happen was mun buns. So that's the scarring that you see on people's bodies, and we call them mun bun or mun bunj. As you're coming out to Wuribender you would have noticed mun bun creek. So basically I'll call that initiation creek and that creek ran into two lakes or two billabongs. And with the event of Google Earth I had a look to see what those two billabongs looked like and there were two snakes. So we're yet to go there, we've got the property owners permission to go in there and have a look around for artifacts and you can bet your bottom dollar that we're going to find artifacts there. So there wasn't too much men's business. I think basically the men took the young boys when they were initiated and then that's it, they were the hunting party. The younger boys stayed home with the mothers and the aunties. And when we went out hunting as men and we went to get a kangaroo or an emu and we missed, we'd come back home with nothing. But guess what? All the kids and the mums and the aunties would have caught the kangaroo rat. They used to snare kangaroo rats, they used to snare possums, they'd catch the lizards, they'd raid the eggs. All the small creatures they would have there for you to eat. The only other thing that men would do would probably get the honey out of a tree. So they would cut footsteps into the tree sometimes or get a porky tree and then they'd lay that up against the tree, that was their ladder. Then they'd climb up the tree. I've actually seen one of them at Warra Binda when I first got here 30 years ago. It was leaned up against the tree and I had to look what they were doing and they were actually cutting the hole in the tree to get the honey. So that's about all I can add there. Probably I just can't think. The next question is just the boundary laws of the kangaroo area and that is the description of the area laws. That's an easier question. The boundaries of the kangaroo people as told by my father and by all the uncles that were alive and probably by all the aunties. And it was to the east when you come in from Rockhampton you cross the Dawson River. That's our eastern boundary. You keep driving on towards Emerald and hit the Comet and that's our western boundary. If we return to the north at Jeringa or Blackwater we hit the Mackenzie River. So the Mackenzie River in the north. So we've got the east, west and north and then we've got the south. So the south we head down towards Bahia New Downs. We don't quite get to Bahia New Downs and we hit a creek called Consoliation Creek. Now Consoliation Creek is a very unusual creek. It's deeper than the other creeks. It looks more like a river and that's why we believe that was the boundary. There was always a boner contention over the southern border. There was a lot of confusion over it. But because this creek was different and once again with the event of Google Earth nowadays we can check things out. So we zoomed in on it and it actually starts up in the expedition range and it runs down into the Dawson. So that completes that section there. On the other side of the expedition range it's a watershed. So all the water runs on the eastern side, runs to the east to the Dawson. And all the water on the western side runs off into the Comet and eventually ends up into the Comet. And on the other side that Consoliation Creek is a creek called Basalt Creek. And it runs down into Arcadia Valley a bit and then across the road and it joins up with Planet Creek. And then Planet Creek joins the Comet. And then the Comet joins in a goer, becomes the Mackenzie. Now to confirm that, I found this before my father passed away and I took it up and I showed him. I said, you always told me that Ralston was never included in Gangaloo Country. And I said, I couldn't understand that because when you drive through Ralston and you head towards Canaver, as soon as you drive through Ralston you cross the Comet. But on the right hand side of the bridge is the Comet. On the left hand side is the Brown. So how can that be? So the Brown River becomes the Comet. So if that was the case, if the Comet River was our boundary, well why wasn't Ralston included but that's why. Because Planet Creek cut into the Comet prior to Ralston. So now the government has accepted that decision or accepted that opinion. So that's where our boundaries are, truly, truly believe. That's where our boundaries are. Oh well, let's start with Warabinda. Warabinda happened in 1927, like I may have mentioned. And before it was Warabinda, what we're sitting on, this was Warabinda. Before it was Warabinda was Waruna. So what had happened, Waruna was probably named by our people. But the Europeans came into the area in about the 1850s. So in the 1850s roundabout they came in and they probably said to one of my ancestors and they probably pointed at the ground and they said, what's this called here? And they looked down and they said kangaroo shit. And word for kangaroo shit is Waruna. So that's the only reason I think they know their property, that. But that's probably getting away from what the question you asked me, but it was quite funny. Because some of the old people, they couldn't get back up the European people. So they used to get their cattle stations bad names. Like for instance, this one station named Dog Balls. Another station named Women's Vagina and all the rest of it. So they couldn't get back, but you can see them laughing, you know, because they couldn't get back up these people. But anyway, yeah, so it was Waruna as part of heritage. But let's have a part of the question. Here that was a bit stupidity, there you might have to cut that out. But the Ganglia people will obviously, we would have moved around our country. And I believe after living on country for 33 years, I come to the conclusion that, for instance, in Warubinda there's two Wallaby scrubs. One's called the Duke White Wallaby Scrub and one's called Eight Mole Scrub. Now why I say that's imported as heritage, is because when we camped here before all the Whitefellas came, all the Camp Mob camped at Eight Mole and all the White Mob carried Duke White, no Aboriginal people too, and they camped at Duke White Scrub. Now if we work at how many different Wallaby scrubs are in the whole area that I just explained, you can bet your bottom dollar that people owned them Wallaby scrubs, because the Wallaby scrubs were also beside water, so we had meat and water. So not only did we go in this section, but who, what Aboriginal people were at the head of the Comet, what people were at the head of the Naga'a, what people were at the Mackenzie River, you know, so you had different clans, if you want to say, all around. We all spoke the same dialect. Not only did we speak the same dialect, we were part of a dialect which is called the Bury. The Bury, B-I-R-R-I dialect, and that dialect runs from here to the Charter's Towers and out to Clemont basically, and we all spoke the same dialect, so to give you an example, across the Mackenzie River on a northern boundary was the Yatamali people. The Yatamali people would have spoke 90% of our words. By the time we got up near Charter's Towers, they probably spoke 10% of our words, because they would have learnt the next lot of language group which I believe was Bummer. So as you go further north they call it Blackman Bummer, here we call them Murries. But anyway, the language groups were there. What was the other bit? Oh, okay. Well, the language we are teaching down the school, I started in 2015 down the school. Milton was down there a bit before that, weren't you? Yeah, Milton was down there a bit before it. So these Milton, my nephew, is down there again still, but we actually put the language into the curriculum down there, so we still got the language in the curriculum down the school now. So we are actually teaching Gangalu language down the school, but we are also teaching them about the environment. So say for instance these blue gum trees here that we got just here, what are they good for? Well, they are good for water for a start. If you cut down a smaller blue gum, probably like that tin of one over yonder, in the morning you cut one down or you break a branch off one of these trees, it will get water, you will get water out of it, and you can drink the water in the morning. If we tried to cut it down now, it is the afternoon, if we tried to cut that down and think that water was going to come out of it, it wouldn't. So what happens overnight, the blue gum tree sucks up water overnight, and then it releases water first thing in the morning, but by the time the afternoon comes it has already released the water up through the leaves into the atmosphere. So someone said, can we drain that water in the morning and carry it with us? No, you can't, because if you drain that water and carry it with you, it will go off and you might get sick on it. So a lot of people walk past creeks that are dry, and all the creeks out here are dry, they have got dry, no water, usually. And so if you see the blue gums, if you can recognise a blue gum, you have got water. So that is another part of it. But also teaching people about the cane groove. So we go get a cane groove, so what are we going to use on it? So you want a fir to keep you warm, are you going to get a cane groove in summertime? Or you are going to get that cane groove in wintertime? In actual fact, you don't need the fir in summertime, do you? So the cane groove grows in wintertime, so you take it off. But not only do you use the fir, you eat the meat, and you also cut the sinews out the tail. The sinews are the best string that you can use. And you can cut about 10 or 12 pieces of string out of a tail, and depending on how long the tail is, how long the piece of string is. And you use that to repair weapons, to tie stone axes in place, and start the spear tips in. And then you can actually put them into your dilly bag, and then they all shivvel up into a ball. Then when you want to use them again, you put them in water and stretch them out. And then use them again. The same with the emu, you use tendons out the leg to tie the stone into the wooden axe, into the wooden handle. All the resources that we teach down the school, the native bees-ness, is another thing. The bees waxes are a very important thing, not only for medicine, but also for repairing stuff, like a hole in the Cullerman. You use some bees wax to repair that. We've used bees wax to repair null and nullers and whatever, whatever. But everything has to be used. You can't just kill something for nothing. Even all the fats, all the fats of animals, so for instance, Gawanna fat cures or assists muscle pain. Emu fat does the same thing, but it's got quite a few other things. What else have we got? Emu fat, echidna fat, eczpa. And then you get into the leaves, certain leaves do certain stuff, like say the soap bush, everyone knows the soap bush. And if you ever get a toothache out of the bush and you've got pain, you get the leaf off the soap bush, crush it all up, mix it with a bit of water and swish your mouth with that, and you wouldn't believe that it'll take you pain of your tooth away. But there's a whole series of medicines that we've recorded, and we're going to pass on knowledge to anyone that wants to learn. So all the young people are coming out now, and so obviously we'll be passing on some knowledge of medicines, of language, of trees. You name it, we'll endure it. Well, the importance of teaching everyone all these types of things, especially the knowledge of the trees, is in repairing the land. So with all the coal mines that surround us, they're starting to close down, and so they're looking to rehabilitate the land. So we've been talking to some coal mines about letting us have a block of dirt, and we'll put our medicine on there, and we'll put our bush tucker on there, and we'll put our bush wows on there, and we'll put wrong-firm timber on there, everything that we needed to put back on there to save all the medicine, and probably make money out of it in the future. So instead of having useless land, someone's got to get off their bum and go and pick the fruit and sell the fruit. Someone goes out there and picks the flower and sells the flower, you know? So, and also learning how to do it, how to germinate it, how to grow it. So that's a bit of a legacy that I would mind leaving behind, and also tell everyone to start creating business, start creating their businesses in regards to repairing their environment. Start learning language, which we have. Some younger ones have printed the book out in Ganglou language, and that's going around Rockampton now. But yeah, I think we'll write up there with other traditional groups that have thought about it, and went up to only ones that are doing it. Yeah, in relation to all this mine rehab and all the rest of it, we need to have companies like IAIM to do the cultural awareness or the cultural awareness to the mine sites. So when you go on a mine site now, they put us through an induction, and we've got to learn their rules, but we want them to learn our rules. We want the contractors to learn our rules, and this isn't just a stone, this is a special stone, you know, and why it is. So the young people, you have to learn what that is. So when you walk through the bush, you've got to use your eye and your nose and your ears and all the rest. Especially your eyes, you look on the ground and you say, hmm, that rock don't belong here. Then one says, why? Well, it's a different colour for a start. Look at all the other rocks around, so someone bought that in, so that's an artifact. Or then you pick it up for further inspection and no, it's not. You know, it's a how to identify artifacts, and this is where the cultural awareness through people like IAIM, companies, also there's other nephews that are running rehabilitation companies that have started their business, and they've got some jobs in rehabilitation process. Then you've got another niece that's doing a job network type of situation, or cleaning services and other NDIS services. What I've said to all my young people is that don't worry too much about native title, because it probably is the wrong way to go, but worry more about indigenous business. And indigenous business will always be there because when native title isn't, they still will employ indigenous business. So we want to arm these companies with the tools to fight, not actually fight the companies, but to be there to win the contracts. So, my name is Milton Wharton. My biganjyoti is Bhejira Skogubing, which means I take my language and language connections from my father, he's a Bhejira man, and I take my spiritual connections from my mother, who is a ganglia woman. So the biganjyoti is your meat, your spirit. I have secondary status on gonglia country, simply because my country is Mijir country, up around the Knaven range's country. But I've been on war with them for 24 years now, coming out here to request to my mother, when she asked me to come out and help the community. I asked one question, what do I do? She said, would you put food in the bellies of the little people, and watch what happens. And that's what I've been doing for the last 24 years, is supporting Uncle Steve and Kent, and ensuring that his story and my mother's story is kept as strong as possible for future generations. I'm just a conjure, I don't aim the story, it comes from the past that's meant for the future. And that's how it's got to be. And I'll pass that story on to my children, my grandchildren, all my relatives, children that they either desire to not want to know it. It's important that we keep these stories strong, because it's all about looking after our spirit. And we look after the country, to enable us to look after our spirit. If we don't care for country, we're not caring for ourselves. So, Aboriginal people haven't had much of a role to play in the past around looking after country, but we're at a position now where different government agencies are starting to divest some of those responsibilities back to our people, and an example of that is fire. So there's a real push around the state to ensure Aboriginal people have a role to play in looking after country, using fire. It was the only tour that was ever needed by our people for thousands of years to ensure that the country has kept healthy and kept strong, and our spirit kept healthy and strong in turn because of that fact. So looking after country is about looking after your spirit, and that's what I am passionate about, and that's where I focus on these days. And I do all this simply because this is my mother's story, and it's Uncle Steve's story, and I'm pretty much held bent and sure that it never dies out. And if our people aren't going to carry the story, and my family aren't going to carry the story, well I was sure that it gets done by someone else, whether it be non-Indigenous people or it is artificial intelligence, such as a robot, and that sort of stuff, yeah. Embracing technology is about the future. It's the one influence we have to break to ensure that young people come home to country. So we have to embrace technology, and I try to do that as much as possible with the work I do at the Mortland and the Prime School. My role at the Prime School is on the community partnership facilitator. Prior to that it was the community cultural coordinator, so basically I was employed to embed the Indigenous perspectives into the curriculum, and I've done that by bringing the Gungalith story to life, resurrecting a lot of that stuff through the knowledge that we carry, the knowledge that we've been given by our forefabers, people like my mother and Uncle Tim and other elders have passed stuff on, and I've kept it strong, and I use that knowledge to ensure that our young people have the ability to understand what all those wonderful resources are out there on country and how they'll be utilized to look after themselves physically and emotionally and spiritually. And I did that on a daily basis every day for the last three years. Men's businesses is how men carry the responsibilities in ensuring that their families are kept strong and healthy, and within that family structure we all have different roles and different responsibilities, and my role within my family is to ensure that the knowledge is kept strong. Other members of my family keep the art long, other members of my family keep the songs strong, other people in my family keep the knowledge around their medicines and bush tucker strong. My responsibility is to ensure that those stories are kept strong, and that's a traditional role that's been passed down from my mothers down to me, and I'm passionate about it and I'm sure that I built on my knowledge. I acknowledge gaps like a lot of our people, but the story is not lost because it's existing in the environment, and when the environment's healed, that knowledge comes back to us when we look in the after country. So we've lost so much, but our story is never lost to the future because unless there's something really dramatic that happens in the environment, our story is not going to change. So that's why I say the keys are out there in the bush, and if you want to find those keys, to unlock all that knowledge that you're born with, it's in your DNA as an Aboriginal person, and non-Indigenous people have the same knowledge. If they're born in this country, they're born under the same spirit of us, so they carry that knowledge too, but they need to understand the country, the environment, in order for them to find the keys to unlock that, and that's what we endeavour to do today to encourage our young people to come back to country, know about their land, know about all those wonderful resources and how they were utilised for thousands of years by our old people to look after ourselves, and that in turn was looking after country too. So it's important that we share this knowledge and keep it strong, and as I said, I'm a firm believer that if my people and my family aren't going to do it for me, someone else is going to do it. I need to make sure that this story is kept strong, so that when I leave, I die as happy as my mother died, because she died happy knowing that her story is going to be kept strong by people like Uncle Steve and myself and other members of the family. Yeah, I am, but I do that with the permission of Uncle Steve, and I'll give you very similar, the very same boundaries that he gave you. Well, Steve had one really nice chunk, and he's going to lead into the language, but if we could get it, it doesn't matter for him. So as I know the boundaries, which were passed on to me by my mothers and also Steve's father, Uncle Tim Kent, it's the Dawson River, from where it meets, starts in the, where it starts, where it meets, sorry, I'll start again. So it's the Dawson River, where it meets the Mackenzie River, they form the Fitzroy. The Mackenzie River, we go up the Mackenzie River until it comes to the junction of the Nogau and the Comet River, where they join. And then we follow the Comet River up, streamed until we come to the, where Planet Creek runs in. And then we come up Planet Creek, and then we take off Planet Creek, we jump onto Bassalt Creek, which flows up onto, comes off the expedition range. And on the other side of where the Bassalt Creek starts, you've got conciliation creek that flows down into the, I'm also into the Dawson River. And then the Dawson River from all the way back down to where it meets the Mackenzie River. That's where I know and believe to be Gunglu Country. Going on this journey, a long, long time ago, my grandfather told me that Gunglu never had a language, it spoke all languages, because we were sitting between the Bury dialect and the Bidger dialect, and we had to understand all those other languages. Because those river systems that carry a story start up there, we, we, we, we, the terminology we use that for the Dullong, the Dullong means the tip of the tongue, and that's where the story starts. So when you speak, the first sound is made by the tip of the tongue, it's the same as when the river starts. So those rivers carry our story down. And as it comes down from those sources where it starts, it picks up the story of all those other groups along those river systems. And then it comes into our country. When we use that water, whether it be for drinking, fishing, washing or whatever, we're actually immersing ourselves in the stories of all those other people. So with the language, Gunglu had a very unique position. We sat between the Bury and dialect, so we were able to converse with most people around us. On one side of the Mackenzie River, right down to the other side of the Canavan Gorge. So an example of that is the Gunglu language has about 60% commonalities with my father's language, which is some four and a half, probably four and a half hours drive south of here, Bidger a country. That's because the environments were very, very similar in terms of the resources and plants and that sort of stuff. So the language was sort of wrapped around that. So there's not much difference between my dad's language, Bidger a language and Gunglu language. I grew up learning predominantly Gunglu and Gunglu language from my mother. And for many years I felt I was neglecting my father's language. But when I started moving into my father's story, it gladdened my heart to know that I was also learning my father's language at the same time because it was about 60% commonalities. And the word Gunglu, I heard you ask uncle Steve that before. I was told that the word Gunglu means all language, all water. And that sits with the Gunglu story. All the water that falls in the Fitzroy catchment touches Gunglu country before it flows from the Fitzroy River. So about 98% of the water that falls from the sky into the Fitzroy catchment touches our mother's country here, uncle Steve's country before it hits the Fitzroy River, the Tunaba and flows into the Ashen. So therefore we get the stories of all those people that sit in this catchment from the weary people to the burrowed people, the couple burrowed the year, the Morala people, the Imin people, Wuli Wuli people, the Garamal people, the Kura Kura people, the Vijurup people and all those people, stories come into Gunglu country, touches our mother's country and then it flows off. The heart of that catchment is the Blackburn Table Ames and that's the source where the Maumosa River starts. It flows down into Warabinda into the Dawson River. Warabinda sits on the Maumosa River for a reason and that's where I know it to be. The Gunglu story of the water and the language. It's critical in terms of the healing of the land after a mining company is finished. So when a mining company finishes, closes down and shuts down, they've left a huge big hole in the ground, they've ripped the heart of our mother out of that land. That needs to be healed and that healing needs to start from the very beginning when they turn that first bit of soil to start looking for that coal and our people need to be involved from that point onwards right to the end because when they close the mines down, they move away, someone's got to heal that land and it's our people that doesn't. We go out and we sing that land and we say we're sorry that we've contributed in some way, whether it be directly working in the mining industry or non-directly where we've supported agreements around cultural heritage management plans to allow these people to come in and rip that coal out of the land. So the healing of the land is really, really important because if we don't, there's only one industry for the future and that's the environment and we have to teach our children from a very early age how important the environment is because without the environment we don't have food production, we don't have nothing. We will all perish and Australia is a harsh enough country now. One of the driest continents of the face of the earth, one of the driest continents in the face of the earth and so we have an extra special role in ensuring that countries looked after and the mining companies have an obligation, I believe, to ensure that they involve our people in this way, to ensure that that country is healed because if it's not healed done the right way throughout that whole process by having the people who work in the mining industry have an understanding of our way of doing business or then the healing is not going to happen and it's so important that country is healed. And mining companies ignore all that stuff because there's no money involved in it but for us it's our story, we need to keep it strong and we need to... and we have a gift for the world too, Aboriginal people, eh? We really do. If we don't have a gift, we are the gift. 40,000, 50,000 years of uninterrupted culture and it's been uninterrupted. 200 years of white man's colonisation hasn't taken that away from us. A lot of the stuff is just lying dormant, waiting for us to resurrect it and we did that by bringing our young people home to country and we use whatever means we can to influence them to say, hey, leave your social media alone, leave everything else alone, come out to country, learn about your story. Go and hug that tree. Steve talked about the blue gum tree before. Very, very important part of our story, that blue gum tree carries up water. Yeah? And I say to people, everything out there transfers knowledge. I'm looking at a tree now. There's no wind blowing. So it's transferring me knowledge. Just tell me, there's no wind blowing. But if there's a wind blowing, that tree would tell me how strong that wind is. It would tell me which direction that wind is coming from. There's a bird in that tree, is that bird nesting? Maybe I can eat his eggs. Is that bird feeding up the tree? Maybe I can eat but that bird's eating. So everything is transferring knowledge from everything living to everything that's not living. Such as rocks, mountains, everything. It's sacred. It all carries a spirit and we have to look after that spirit. So just a bit of an example about, on that is, there's a story that was passed down to us. And Steve and his father taught me the song was about a kangaroo hunt. The men were now at hunk and hunting. They speared a kangaroo. The kangaroo hopped away and they had to go and find it. They had to sing that animal spirit to ensure that it started its journey to the next life in the most beautiful way. They were tracking it before they could find that kangaroo. The rain came and washed away the tracks. They knew they wouldn't be able to find that kangaroo. So what they did, they came back to Warabinda and they sang his spirit. And they danced that animal spirit. We do that on a regular basis. We take a piece of bark off that tree, we do it with protocols. We ask permission from that tree. Then we say we're sorry but it's needed to ensure that that tree's spirit looked after. Because if we're not doing that, we're not looking after our spirit. Why go and take something from the land with that uncle, ask an uncle Steve? I'm in trouble. And I need to make sure that I'm looking after my spirit. So we need to make sure that we take nothing from the country without asking our old people's permission. We're just acknowledging the fact that we used it and we only take it for educational purposes. We don't take it for any other purposes other than to utilise to educate our young people about their forefathers and mothers and the wonderful legacy that they've under us. They left us and we have to honour that legacy. If we don't, we're not being treated ourselves as Aboriginal people and we're not looking after ourselves the way that we need to look after ourselves. That environment is very, very important and that's what I teach at school. I teach the kids about plants and animals, everything I know. And we do that in a simple way. Every classroom in our school has a totem of an animal. The children in that classroom for 12 months, in that 12 months they learn everything about that creature. It's habitat where it lives, what it feeds on, how it breeds. They're a whole cycle of life with that particular animal. The next year they go to another class and they'll learn about that animal. Until we're at grade 6, they've learned about 10 animals and they've learned about all the little idiosyncrasies that involves each of those animals, how they live, where they live, what they feed on, everything, those life cycles. And we teach them that they're all dependent and independent on one another. So the Guana, for instance, he's dependent on the scrub turkey to a certain degree because he goes down in winter, waits for the first big clap of thunder to come, wakes him up, first thing he's doing is looking for food, he's hungry. That's the start of the scrub turkey breed the season. So he'll go looking for that sort of stuff. He'll look for anything to fill his guts if he come across the scrub turkey. And yes, he'll rate it. And I'm a scrub turkey. I'm a guggubing. And so I was compelled to know all about that animal before I started my journey and it was Uncle Steve Kep's father, granddad Tim, who gave me a real insight into the life cycle of that animal because he made it clear that it was important that I know who I am. And in order for me to do that, I needed to know what my totem was and my totem was a scrub turkey. So I know a lot about that little fella, how he lives, how he reproduces, what he eats, all that sort of stuff. And the role that he plays in the environment too is very, very important. Unfortunately, land clearing in the impact that industry has had on country, a lot of those scrub, their scrub turkeys totally disappeared from our country here. But we've still seen them on the coastline. They're not our mob. They are our mob, but they're living on another man's land. So, and I was also told that that scrub turkey's sacred to me. I can't utilise him for food or anything unless I'm absolutely starving out there and I've got nothing to eat and that scrub turkey come along, as Uncle Steve says, you've got to take it and eat it, but you ask permission from the old people. That ensues that one less family impact is upon that species. So someone whose family's totem is an emu, they leave that animal alone. They're protecting that animal too. So that's one less family impacting on that species. And this is how the system worked. There was a very complicated system, a very, very simple system. It was based on the laws of nature. And if you understand nature, you'll understand our law, L-O-R-E. And that's how it worked for our people. And it works today for us because we're here today and we're still carrying the same knowledge and the same story. I'm 67 years of age today. Next year I become a pensioner. I was born for the aged care pension. And in that regard, I've achieved a lifelong goal that I set when I was a three-year-old. I was born with some, when I was born I was afflicted with some pretty serious childhood illnesses, lead poisoning meningitis. When I got out of hospital they took me bush and an old gentleman asked me, what are you going to be when you grow up? Boy, I'm going to be like you, what a pensioner. And next year I'll achieve that goal. And that's after that, I don't care what happens in my life after that. Because I've achieved something that I've set as a child. I've become a pensioner, not that I'm going to tap in, I've become an aged care pensioner, I plan to work and continue doing what I'm doing. And if I can generate an income out of that, so be it, if not, that's okay. You'll end up there survive. Anything else? I am part of the future for their family as well. They've just done a laborator. Well, they're moving in the right direction because see the people that's going to be tasked with healing that country. When the mining company is finished with that kind of dirt, people like Bayes Young, people that are setting up these businesses to work within that industry, it'll be their responsibility to ensure that the mining company includes the healing of country in their program. So what you guys are doing with AIM I think is absolutely fantastic. It is the future. I'll support anything that you guys will be doing because I know your heart's in the right place. As I said before, mining companies, industry, local government, everyone has a role to play in contributing to looking after country. And if we don't build those bridges between relationships between these people, such as mining companies, so we can sit down and have these conversations and impress upon them the importance of looking after country. Instead of just thinking that that's worth dollars to them, there'll be nothing in the future. And we know that without the environment, we're not going to have a future. And we in Australia are impacted greatly on this by climate change. I believe in climate change. I believe it's happening. I've seen too much that's happened in my lifetime that things that were there before that aren't here now. Animals are breeding at the wrong time of the year as opposed to how they would traditionally do it before the stuff happened. Everything's gone haywire a little bit to some extent. But I believe that companies like AIM and what you're doing is really, really important because it's about the future. And people like myself and Uncle Steve, we're not going to be around it forever. So it's important that you guys have an understanding of the role that you need to play to have our people in a position to be able to come back and heal those minds. And the best way to do that, I believe, is to encourage those people that you work with in the mining industries that encourage them to have a sense of belonging. And the deeper that belonging goes, the easier it is going to be for your job. And they need to understand that they're carrying the responsibility that has been taken away from us. And they need to carry that in a way that we would carry it to as much as possible we can. We no longer have the ability to do that because of how things are. As much as we'd love to be there, we're slowly seeing some change button. Our people are moving into this industry. They're moving in as employees and minors. But when we see people like what you guys are doing, what the Kemp boys are doing in terms of mine real rehabilitation, that's really, really important for us, for me, myself. Because I know that the story will continue. And like I said, it's not lost. The story is never lost. We've all had these knowledge gaps. I have huge knowledge gaps in my identity too. But I can feel those knowledge gaps waving conversations. Those conversations don't always, that knowledge don't always come from my own people. They come from non-indigenous Australians who've had some sort of contact with their people, who've given some specific information. And I've found that throughout my whole life that non-indigenous people have helped me feel some of my own knowledge gaps around this because they did a lot of documentation, a lot of recording, whereas our people didn't. And they weren't encouraged to keep their culture strong. In fact, they were punished and discouraged from keeping it strong. So we tapped into all the resources we can to ensure that this story is kept strong. And these mining companies need to understand that they have a role to play for the future of their children and grandchildren, not just for our people, but for everyone who lives in this wonderful country called Australia. And it is a special country. We're not the lucky country. Gee, we're just a special country. And we need to ensure that this stuff is kept as strong as possible and everyone has the role to play in it. You guys have a role to play in educating mining people, employees, about the importance of preserving our cultural heritage. I don't get too involved in that. I've seen what Native title can do, so I work outside the Native title framework. I'm a firm believer that I shouldn't be compelled to use the peace and government legislation to determine my identity. That's my birthright. And I have to honour that birthright by doing what I can on a daily basis to look after my mother's country and my father's country, my great-grandmother and my great-grandmother's country. I've spent my whole life in my catchment, apart from probably four and a half years in total. I can't function away from my water. It's really, really important that people can travel the world and carry the Koran and the Bible in their pocket and pull it out and nourish their spirit no matter where they are, but for us Aboriginal people. We go to those places that are so specific to nourish our spirit. And if I could put the Kanaavan Gorge in my pocket, I'd travel the world too. But I can't, so I go back to a Kanaavan on a regular basis just to renew, reinvigorate, and just to unload some of the baggage that I might have picked up in that course of the period between visits. And the Kanaavan Gorge plays that for me. Kanaavan Gorge is a very, very special place. It's a big matriarchal story. There's always been confusion about the role of women in keeping our country's story strong, but I'm a firm believer that women play the most important role. Women carry the story. We are sometimes privileged to be allowed to share that story. But it's the women. They do all that good stuff with the babies from birth or from conception actually right through to when they get to the point where they cross over and we need to support those young ones in every way possible. Will they be indigenous and non-indigenous to ensure that they understand when they're cross over, they're not feeling frustrated and confused because of the things that are going on, the changes in their body, the changes in their chemical, changes that go on in their mind. And we had special processes in place to ensure that that was done in a really beautiful way. And we've lost a lot of that stuff. Some of the stuff we can't resurrect. Some of the stuff we've, it's imperative that we resurrect, but there's some things we've left behind and that's because of the way society is living today. But I am cooking a kid in a fan-forced oven these days. Wow, people cooked it on the ground. But the essence now is that I took that animal's life is still the same way as I did. My grandfathers and grandmothers took that home. They were a saner spirit to ensure that that gift that that land gave to us was used in the best way possible. Medicines, resources, all sorts of stuff. And we do that today. We keep it strong and it's through the knowledge that our forefathers and mothers have left us. And we build on that. And I can go to another man's country and pick up knowledge that will assist me in filling my knowledge gaps in my story. Also, for Aboriginal people, no matter where you are in Australia, we all tell the same story about our environments when it's time and outstiled. There's people, different resources in their environment. Saltwater people, different rainforest people, totally different, but it's the same story. Just that the resources in there are wrapped around their daily lifestyle and their serenity. But it's the same story. And this is why we say to all Australians, Bitter yuntala go a long way. Yuntala means there's one in one place. As one with each other is one with their mother. We all have her in common no matter who you are, where you come from. That is our mother. And we are obligated to look after our mothers, aren't we? And she's a big mother. So it's important that we sometimes have to make sacrifices to ensure that we need to do to keep her strong and healthy. That in terms of keeping our spirits strong and healthy and look after us. There are some things that Aboriginal people can provide to the greater world, in Australia in particular, that could assist in halving the health burden of this country quite dramatically. Education, financial burden can be halved within a couple of generations. If they only allow Aboriginal people to take a little bit of ownership and a little bit of autonomy and how we look after ourselves. Because we've done it for 50,000 years. We've done it beautifully. And we're still here today and we're still using the same things that our old people have used to keep their spirits strong and look after our body. And that's it for me. My name is Dwayne Dwell. My Euro big guns is the Google Bench on my mum's side, down through Nanna Elsie Camp Sando. My tribe is of my father, Georgie Theodoyle. Inman, down towards Taroon Hornet Bank, down that way. And words of elders. Our water flows from the one place, except the water flows that flow from the North country. And about 1% over in the Don's River. And when the Connors River meets up with Sandy Creek, that makes the Ngora that way. Otherwise, the headwaters for the Ngora River starts up in the Moffatt area. And that's the Midgera country. For the Browns and the Comet River. That starts up in the Common Grounds, Goringville country. Up in the Canavan Gorge. And for the headwaters for the Mackenzie River. It's when the Ngora and the Comet River meet up, make the headwaters for Mackenzie and the Gungaloo people. Carried that water flow right up until it met up with the Dawson River through the Inman people. Up in the North country. So that water flow of Mackenzie and the Dawson is quite a few couple hundred kilometres. And the headwater for the Fitzroy begins up in the North country. And the Durumble people carried that all the way through until it got to the ocean. And then Wapabara and Konomi from the Keppel Islands looked after that water flow there. And then they all, that water flow evaporated back up into the air. And the cycle of that water flow from Canavan all the way out to the ocean. The Port Curtis, the mouth of the river for the Fitzroy takes fourteen days. For the Three Rivers, some people have been asking about the Three Rivers. And the Three Rivers is when the Ngora and the Comet meet up and make the Mackenzie. Well, a lot of marriages and a lot of children, offspring, come from those rivers. But they also back in those early days through convalesciation now my ancestors become fringe dwellers. And it was the tribes of these Three Rivers that made the choice to walk into Warabinda. And they walk into Warabinda with the spirit and learnt about the non-Aboritonal ways. And after many years, like 20, 30 years, our elders, or my elders, walked out with the spirit. And went back to their own home country basically to pick up work, find work. And to create the next generation of Aboriginal people for our lives today that we are today basically. Identity is important. We need to know who we are and where we come from basically to help us live here today knowing who we are and where we're going towards the future. In the early days basically we were appointed, directed or guided by our elders to go into certain employment areas. Some of us were directed and guided into health. Some of us are directed and guided into education or sport. Back in the 70s our people were cattle people. Around the Arcadia Valley a lot of employment came from that area back in the early days through cattle and agriculture, farming. So our people just went back to the land. But through the years they were having children. So this built up the future generation and our children back then had to become educated. So for many, many years they made a goal, made a plan or a dream to go meet up in Rockampton. A lot of the Murrays went towards Clemont Way up towards Springshore and this wasn't just over night time, years. They stayed there and had children in these places, Sandy Creek up that way. And then they made their way back towards Rockampton. And then in Rockampton this is where my uncles and aunties generation really got into education. And started learning a little bit more about the white man's world basically. And how we're to create space for ourselves to fit in it and create more of our children. This land here that we're on Gungaloo Country, or through the whole Gungaloo language, meaning One Water, Gungaloo Water, One Grow One. Only 5,000 people could sustain back before conicalization. So any children born after 5,000 unfortunately had to go and see their dreaming a lot sooner than the rest of us. But because a lot of our traditional mob were going to their dreaming, our women and our men folk had to create more babies. So today we may have over 5,000 Aboriginal people living in the Gungalongra. And these people now need a future. And once upon a time the cattle industry provided that future. The Queensland Railway contributed to helping us make our way as well. Our people, our men folk would from Rockampton would go out to Blackwater, Bluff, Gringer, Emerald. And we had along that railway line, we had all our Murray men working along that line, creating the Empire of Queensland Railway. Towards the early 80s the government back in those days sold shares. And they started going to private enterprise and our people lost jobs. They lost a lot of work back in those days on the railway. So when they went back home to Rockampton, we just lived a lifestyle that was given to us back then. Living in Rocky, a lot of us did get jobs in Rocky, whether it was in the white man's world, on the council mainly or in the health system. Some of us did find sport. Some of us basically stayed in education. Some went to be truck drivers. Some went on to be politicians. But today, year 2025, we need another opportunity for our Aboriginal people to go back to country and work. And a long time ago, when I was living on the land, it was explained to me through some elders that the future of it is through the mining company. And it's about trying to get our people back to country, back living on country, creating the next generation of Aboriginal people basically to carry us more towards the future. And with IAIM, I found that I loved the idea of IAIM because IAIM came to me and explained it to me before they got to be where they are now. About 12 months ago, they explained to me what was going on. And I fell in love with the idea and I started ringing bells in my ear. Oh, this is what the elders were talking about over 20 years ago to me, out on country. And we're going to use the mining companies through Central Queensland to support my elders' dreams. Yep. Okay, my name is Michelle Leesha. I am the first blood of the traditional owners of this country, which is Gungaloo. My bloodline runs all around this country. And I live in Waurabinda. My father was born on the Mamosa. His placenta was buried there. So that connection to this country is strong in regards to the property owners, the Dunn family of massive property owners here and our grandparents and our great-nana and poppy, they worked the country with them. And there was an old fella called Billy Dunn. He was one that spoke our Gungaloo language. And we've got photos of him with our great-grandparents. And he kept a record of us being on this country. So, yeah, our grandparents worked the country on his big properties and that. But yeah, that's me, Michelle Leesha, and I'm a proud Gungaloo woman. And yeah, my spirit just jumped in, aye. It's been jumping for a while now because I know where I sit, where I am, and all my knowledge that was handed down to me, my dad and my mum, and I come out and I met up with my uncles, and my uncle Steve Kent there, and my dad's brother, Uncle Campbell Leesha. So the strength of our culture is very strong here, and we're very humble people. There is no title issues, but we don't... Well, women's business is very important to our culture because it's set up for our women to respect our bodies, respect our spirit and respect our mind, and it gets handed down. So not every woman in a tribe will know about women's business. They've got to have someone to teach them. So that comes from our elders, our women elders, and they pick, as the years go, that the spirit of our women elders will pick that young girl, that young lady, and will start giving her the knowledge. But the knowledge that she gained has also been passed down from women to women. And that... So women's business is very important in regards to respect, in regards to everything from nurturing a baby from... on your bunja, to birthing a baby, to carrying that baby all the way through until it's a boy or girl. We play a very important role in a cultural way in women's business, and that's Alawari, not LAW. So it's very important to us. We help young girls from birth journey over to becoming a young woman, and we talk about that as young women. Back in the days, it was a different... it was a different... it was different putting a woman's business across because it was very strict, massively strict. So for a young man and a young woman to gear together, it was the... the aunties and uncles that went and looked for that partner for that young girl. So that bloodline can carry on. So it was like an arranged marriage. We've had it... we had it in our culture. And it also kept the tribe strong and connecting tribes together strong, because when we sit down and we have our meetings and that or work out things, we can all sit together and talk in harmony. So... and women's business as strong as because we go out and do the gathering, we go and hunt, we go and go for our foods for certain areas where we know where it is. And we got a seasonal wheel and it all connects with women's business and men's business, right? But I'm at that stage now where I am doing women's business. So I help families to bury placentas on country. So we've got a ceremony for that. And what that does is connect that baby to this country. So that spirit is safe, that spirit can go fly, look around and come back and touch the ground. So women's business is very important. We matriarchal. We owe that line as matriarchals and that. Are young people coming through? Oh, massively. Because I used to work in the wine industry years ago in Blackwater with BHP and I was a cleaner. So I used to do 120Ks a day and I used to do about 28 cribs cleaning. So when I drove one country on the Hall Road, I felt a strong connection with certain areas. So I go and talk to my elders about this area. And you've got an 80K drive through the mine site, right? It's got to be 80Ks. But when I hit a certain area, it'll be so slow. Because I know that the old people are talking to me. This is a connection, right? So we've had people come on country and talk about the culture, right? That might be well-versed, but they're not well-versed on Gangaloo country, right? Our people lived this land, worked it, nourished it and we nourished from it ourselves. Our spirits are here. And when the young nieces came to me and Uncle Steve and Uncle Brother Milton and talked about their journey of I aim and they come for us with the knowledge, well, we couldn't be, we were just so eager to give it to them, you know? And we had to go back and say, okay, because our knowledge has got to be passed on. And back in the days it was a closed book. But now we've got to go back, we've got to open it up and we've got to share our culture. And these young girls that are going around now to the schools and really putting themselves out there, it's a journey for them, right? But they're going to come up through brick walls. But I always say, when I talk to the young ladies, I always say to Crystal and I mean Ronnie and I said, do not sit there and debate your culture. I said, you walk away and you let the old people deal with it and that. So for them to go into the mines, that's going to be good. It's going to open it all up. It's going to give the mines, these big nods, an opening book to our culture and our law on land, L-O-R-E. And it's going to be culturally sensitive because they understand where we sit as a people of this country where we never get opportunities. And when we did get opportunities, we were put down. So these young ladies that are out doing IAIM is massive and we're going to support them all the way. And they're going to be a force to be reckoned with in the future. You can see it happening. I've started a business here, Gunglu Investments. I do the NDIS on community. Slow process. But that's what these young girls are going to take, that slow process. Don't rush anything. Think. Learn your culture. Because I know that I learn my culture every day. Something new happens. And this is what these young girls are going to come across. But IAIM, I support them. Their spirit and their mannerisms is massive and it's out there. So they've got to keep going and we're here to support them. Yeah, they're going to be supporting us.