G'day, my name's Dylan Wheedle, this is my wife Sarah and newborn Bub Chloe. On our shoe we came in property here at Victoria Plains about a half an hour outside of Macau. Sarah and I were both working at the mines at the time and we were looking for an investment opportunity and something to do in our spare time. We had a look around at a few different farms in the area and thought this might be something we could ever go up. You had a spreadsheet for every farm that was for sale in the district and that's how we made our decision on which one we'd buy. It was really instrumental and I've been able to get into farming was through the first start line. We managed to save up a bit of a deposit where we were able to access some finance and the first start line allowed us to start and from there we've built. We're living the life now that we're very happy here and it's definitely become the life and who we are. The application process, like any application process, took time and we had to put some effort into it. We hadn't come from a Cain Farm in background, populating some of those application forms of bit treaty and I think that's where the regional manager at the time was really helpful. Bill and Sarah Wheel are some really innovative Cain Farmers. They're really on the pulse with their business numbers, they understand the cost of production figures, they understand diversification and the importance of that. So they're not only just growing sugarcane but they're also growing soil beans to improve their overall business productivity, their profitability and also their soil health in the long term. We've got a fixed amount of land here and we don't try and make as much money as possible for as long as possible. There's a lot of support out there to be able to encourage new people into the industry and they're really encouraged people to reach out. It's a lifestyle and we love it but it's a business and it feeds our family. You wanted to get in the farming and you're not really sure whether you're ready to go or not. Early conversations with the likes and the curado regional managers are going to be important to be able to give you a bit of guidance in terms of what your timeline is going to be and how far away that potential coaches see your first farm like that. I really encourage new entrances and farming to come and have a chat with curado early to discuss the security requirements, the equity requirements and also those production and cash flow figures that will help to secure your loan.